
                    Call for Papers
                         for
                   Sixth Workshop on 
     Language Descriptions, Tools and Applications

                       LDTA 2006

            A satellite event of ETAPS 2006
            in Cooperation with ACM SIGPLAN
      Saturday, April 1, 2006 in Vienna, Austria

                http://ldta06.cs.umn.edu


Scope:

The aim of this one-day workshop is to bring together researchers from
academia and industry interested in the field of formal language
definitions and language technologies, with a special emphasis on
tools developed for or with these language definitions. This active
area of research involves the following basic technologies:

  - Program analysis, transformation, and generation
  - Formal analysis of language properties
  - Automatic generation of language processing tools

For example, language definitions can be augmented in a manner so that
not only compilers or interpreters can be automatically generated but
also other tools such as syntax-directed editors, debuggers, partial
evaluators, test generators, documentation generators, etc. Although
various specification formalisms like attribute grammars, action
semantics, operational semantics, and algebraic approaches have been
developed, they are not widely exploited in current practice.

It is the aim of the LDTA workshops to bridge this gap between theory
and practice. Among others, the following application domains can
benefit from advanced language technologies:

  - Software component models and modeling languages
  - Re-engineering and re-factoring
  - Aspect-oriented programming
  - Domain-specific languages
  - XML processing
  - Visualization and graph transformation
  - Programming environments such as Eclipse, .net, Rotor, SUN Java, etc.

The workshop welcomes contributions on all aspects of formal language
definitions, with special emphasis on applications and tools developed
for or with these language definitions.


Invited Speaker:

The invited speaker for LDTA 2006 is Jean Bezivin, Universite de
Nantes.


Important Dates:

 - Submission deadline:           December 1, 2005.
 - Notification:                  January 16, 2006
 - Final version due:             February 15, 2006
 - Workshop:                      April 1, 2006


Submission Procedure and Publication:

Submission will be open from autumn 2005.  Two classes of papers are
solicited: full-length research papers and short tool-demo papers.
Tool-demo papers should contain a brief description of the tool and
include a section that clearly explains what will be demonstrated.

Full-length papers should be at most 15 pages in length and tool-demo
papers should be at most 4 pages in length.  Both classes of papers
should be submitted electronically as PostScript or PDF files to both
of the program committee chairs, John Tang Boyland at
Boyland@cs.uwm.edu and Tony Sloane at asloane@ics.mq.edu.au.  The
message should also contain a text-only abstract and contact author
information.

Additional submission details, along with LaTeX style files, are
available on the LDTA 2006 web page: \texttt{ldta06.cs.umn.edu}.  The
final versions of accepted papers will be published in Electronic
Notes in Theoretical Computer Science (ENTCS), Elsevier Science, and
will be made available during the workshop.

The authors of the best full-length papers will be invited to write a
journal version of their paper which will be separately reviewed and,
assuming acceptance, be published in journal form.  As in past years,
this will be done in a a special issue devoted to LDTA 2006 of the
journal Science of Computer Programming (Elsevier Science).


Program Committee:

 - Uwe Assmann, Dresden Technical University, Germany
 - John Tang Boyland, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, USA
   (co-chair), Boylan@cs.uwm.edu
 - Jim Cordy, Queen's University, Canada
 - Jan Heering, Centrum voor Wiskunde en Informatica (CWI), The
    Netherlands 
 - Nigel Horspool, University of Victoria, Canada
 - Johan Jeuring, Utrecht University, The Netherlands
 - Adrian Johnstone, Royal Holloway, University of London, UK
 - Steven Klusener, Vrije Universiteit, The Netherlands
 - David Lacey, University of Warwick, United Kingdom
 - Brian Malloy, Clemson University, USA
 - Paul Roe, Queensland University of Technology, Australia
 - Michael Schwartzbach, BRICS, University of Aarhus, Denmark
 - Tony Sloane, Macquarie University, Australia (co-chair),
   asloane@ics.mq.edu.au 
 - Yannis Smaragdakis, Georgia Institute of Technology, USA
 - David Watt, University of Glasgow, Scotland
 - David Wile, Teknowledge Corp, USA


Organizing Committee:

 - Eric Van Wyk, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, USA,
   evw@cs.umn.edu 
 - Joost Visser, University of Minho, Braga, Portugal,
   Joost.Visser@di.uminho.pt 
