[DEADLINE EXTENDED: Title and Abstract Dec 4, Paper Dec 11]

                    Call for Papers
                         for
                  Seventh Workshop on 
     Language Descriptions, Tools and Applications

                       LDTA 2007

            A satellite event of ETAPS 2007
            March 25, 2007 in Braga, Portugal

             In cooperation with ACM SIGPLAN

             http://www.di.uminho.pt/ldta07

Scope:

The aim of this one-day workshop is to bring together researchers from
academia and industry interested in the field of formal language
definitions and language technologies, with a special emphasis on
tools developed for or with these language definitions. This active
area of research involves the following basic technologies:

  - Program analysis, transformation, and generation
  - Formal analysis of language properties
  - Automatic generation of language processing tools

For example, language definitions can be augmented in a manner so that
not only compilers or interpreters can be automatically generated but
also other tools such as syntax-directed editors, debuggers, partial
evaluators, test generators, and documentation generators. Although
various specification formalisms like attribute grammars, action
semantics, operational semantics, and algebraic approaches have been
developed, they are not widely exploited in current practice.

It is the aim of the LDTA workshops to bridge this gap between theory
and practice. Among others, the following application domains can
benefit from advanced language technologies:

  - Software component models and modeling languages
  - Re-engineering and re-factoring
  - Aspect-oriented programming
  - Domain-specific languages
  - XML processing
  - Visualization and graph transformation
  - Programming environments such as Eclipse, NetBeans and Visual Studio
  - Modern runtime platforms including .Net, Rotor, Java Virtual Machine

The workshop welcomes contributions on all aspects of formal language
definitions, with special emphasis on applications and tools developed
for or with these language definitions. Experience papers describing
novel or compelling uses of language definition-based methods in real
world projects are particularly sought.

Invited Speaker:

The invited speaker for LDTA 2007 is Uwe Assmann from TU Dresden.

Important Dates:

 - Submission deadline:           December 4, 2006 (title and abstract)
                                  December 11, 2006 (paper)
 - Notification:                  January 16, 2007
 - Final version due:             February 16, 2007
 - Workshop:                      March 25, 2007

Submission Procedure and Publication:

Submission will be open from autumn 2006.  Three classes of papers
are solicited: research papers, experience reports and short tool-demo
papers. Experience reports must describe the use of a language-based
tool to solve a non-trivial applied problem with an emphasis on the
advantages and disadvantages of the tool. Tool-demo papers should
contain a brief description of the tool and include a section that
clearly explains what will be demonstrated. 
    
Research papers and experience reports should be at most 15 pages in
length and tool-demo papers should be at most 4 pages in length.  All
classes of paper should be submitted electronically as PostScript or
PDF files to both of the program committee chairs, Tony Sloane at
asloane@ics.mq.edu.au and Adrian Johnstone at adrian@cs.rhul.ac.uk.
The message should also contain a text-only abstract and contact author
information.

Additional submission details, along with LaTeX style files, are
available on the LDTA 2007 web page: http://www.di.uminho.pt/ldta07.
The final versions of accepted papers will be published in Electronic
Notes in Theoretical Computer Science (ENTCS), Elsevier Science, and
will be made available during the workshop.

The authors of the best full-length papers will be invited to write a
journal version of their paper which will be separately reviewed and,
assuming acceptance, be published in journal form.  As in past years,
this will be done in a a special issue devoted to LDTA 2007 of the
journal Science of Computer Programming (Elsevier Science).

Program Committee:

 - Judith Bishop, University of Pretoria, South Africa
 - Claus Brabrand, BRICS, University of Aarhus, Denmark
 - Nigel Horspool, University of Victoria, Canada
 - Johan Jeuring, Utrecht University, The Netherlands
 - Adrian Johnstone, Royal Holloway, University of London, UK
   (co-chair), adrian@cs.rhul.ac.uk
 - Steven Klusener, Vrije Universiteit, The Netherlands
 - Kent Lee, Luther College, USA
 - Brian Malloy, Clemson University, USA
 - Terence Parr, University of San Francisco, USA
 - Michael Schwartzbach, BRICS, University of Aarhus, Denmark
 - Tony Sloane, Macquarie University, Australia (co-chair),
   asloane@ics.mq.edu.au
 - Jurgen Vinju, CWI, The Netherlands

Organizing Committee:

 - Thomas Noll, RWTH Aachen University, Germany,
   noll@cs.rwth-aachen.de
 - Alcino Cunha, University of Minho, Braga, Portugal,
   alcino@di.uminho.pt
